CampusX
Types of Statistics
Descriptive statistics
Inferential statistics
Population vs Sample
Parameter Vs Statistics
Inferential Statistics
Types of Data
Measures of Central Tendency
Mean
Median
Mode
Weighted Mean
Trimmed Mean
Measures of Dispersion
Range
Variance
Standard Deviation
Coefficient of Variation
Graphs for Univariate Analysis
Categorical
Frequency Distribution Table And Cumulative Frequency
Numerical
Frequency Distribution Table and Histogram
Shapes of Histogram
Graphs for Bivariate analysis
Categorical - Categorical
Contingency Table/Crosstab
Numerical - Numerical
Scatter Plot
Percentiles and Quantiles
Quantiles
Percentile
5 Number Summary
Interquartile Range
Covariance
Calculation of Covariance
What problem does Covariance solve?
Disadvantages of Covariance

Covariance of a variable with itself
Correlation
Correlation and Causation
Other correlation coefficients
Visualizing Multiple Variables
Random Variables
Probability Distributions
Problem with Distribution?
Types of Probability Distribution Functions (PDF)
Famous Distributions
Why are Probability Distributions important?
A note on Parameters
Probability Distribution Function
Probability Mass Function
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) for a PMF
Probability Density Function
Why is it probability density and not probability?
What does the area under the graph represent?
How to calculate Probability of a single value of r.v. ?
Density Estimation
Parametric Density Estimation
Non - Parametric Density Estimation
Kernel Density Estimation
How to use PDF in Data Science?
How to use CDF in Data Science?
How to use 2D Density Plots ?
Normal Distribution
What is normal distribution?
Why is it so important?
Commonality in Nature
PDF equation for Normal Distribution
Standard Normal Variate
PDF equation for Standard Normal Variate
Why Standardize data?
How to Standardize data?
Z-tables
Properties of Normal Distribution
Symmetricity
Measures of Central Tendencies are equal
Empirical Rule
Area under the curve
CDF of Normal Distribution
Skewness
How is Skewness calculated?

Statistical Moments
Kurtosis
Practical use-case
Excess Kurtosis
Types of Kurtosis
Leptokurtic
Platykurtic
Mesokurtic
QQ Plot
How to find if a given distribution is normal or not?
Visual Inspection:
QQ Plot:
Statistical Tests:
What is a QQ Plot and how is it plotted?
Uniform distribution
What is Uniform Distribution and its types?
Application in Machine Learning and Data Science
Log Normal Distribution
Pareto Distribution
Pareto Distribution
What is Power Law?
Graph & Parameters
Examples
Bernoulli Distribution
Binomial Distribution
Criteria:
Binary classification problems:
Hypothesis testing:
Logistic regression:
A/B testing:
Sampling Distribution
Why Sampling Distribution is important?
The Central Limit Theorem
Case Study - What is the average income of Indians
Population Vs Sample
Population
Sample
Parameter Vs Estimate/Statistic
Parameter
Statistic
Inferential Statistics
Point Estimate
Confidence Interval
Confidence Interval (Sigma Known)

Assumptions
Interpreting Confidence Intervals
Confidence level
Interval range
Interpretation
What is the trade-off ?
Factors Affecting Margin of Error
Confidence Level (1-alpha)
Sample Size
Population Standard Deviation
Confidence Interval (Sigma Not Known)
Assumptions
Student's t Distribution
Hypothesis Testing
Null and Alternate Hypothesis
Steps involved in Hypothesis Testing
Rejection Region Approach
Performing a z-test
Rejection Region
Problem with Rejection Region Approach
Type 1 and Type 2 Error
Type-I (False Positive)
Type-II (False Negative)
One sided vs. Two sided Test
One-sided (one-tailed) test
Two-sided (two-tailed) test
Where can be Hypothesis applied ?
Hypothesis Testing ML Applications
p-value
Interpreting p-value
With significance value
Without significance value
p-value in context of z-test
t-test
Single Sample t-test
Assumptions for a single sample t-test
Independent 2 Sample t-test
Assumptions for the test
Independent 2 Sample t-test
Common scenarios where a paired two-sample t-test is used include:
Assumptions
Chi-Square Distribution
Properties
Chi-Square Test

Goodness of Fit Test
Steps
Assumptions
Test for Independence
Steps
Assumptions
Applications in Machine Learning
F-Distribution
One way ANOVA test
Steps
Assumptions
Post-hoc Test
Why is t-test not used for more than 3 categories?
Application in Machine Learning
Regression Analysis
What's the statistics connection?
Why is Regression Analysis required?

Types of Statistics
Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics deals with the collection, organization, analysis, interpretation, and
presentation of data. It focuses on summarizing and describing the main features of a set of
data, without making inferences or predictions about the larger population.

Inferential statistics
Inferential statistics deals with making conclusions and predictions about a population based
on a sample. It involves the use of probability theory to estimate the likelihood of certain events
occurring, hypothesis testing to determine if a certain claim about a population is supported by
the data, and regression analysis to examine the relationships between variables.

Population vs Sample
Population refers to the entire group of individuals or objects that we are interested in studying. It
is the complete set of observations that we want to make inferences about. For example, the
population might be all the students in a particular school or all the cars in a particular city.
A sample, on the other hand, is a subset of the population. It is a smaller group of individuals or
objects that we select from the population to study. Samples are used to estimate characteristics of
the population, such as the mean or the proportion with a certain attribute. For example, we might
randomly select 100 students.
Examples:
● All cricket fans vs fans who were present in the stadium
● All students vs who visit college for lectures
Things to be careful about which creating samples:
● Sample Size
● Random
● Representative

Parameter Vs Statistics
Parameter is a characteristic of a population, while a statistic is a characteristic of a sample.
Parameters are generally unknown and are estimated using statistics. The goal of statistical

inference is to use the information obtained from the sample to make inferences about the
population parameters.

Inferential Statistics
Inferential statistics is a branch of statistics that deals with making inferences or predictions about
a larger population based on a sample of data. It involves using statistical techniques to test
hypotheses and draw conclusions from data. Some of the topics that come under inferential
statistics are:
1.

Hypothesis testing: This involves testing a hypothesis about a population parameter based on
a sample of data. For example, testing whether the mean height of a population is different
from a given value.

2. Confidence intervals: This involves estimating the range of values that a population
parameter could take based on a sample of data. For example, estimating the population
mean height within a given confidence level.
3. Analysis of variance (ANOVA): This involves comparing means across multiple groups to
determine if there are any significant differences. For example, comparing the mean height
of individuals from different regions.
4. Regression analysis: This involves modeling the relationship between a dependent variable
and one or more independent variables. For example, predicting the sales of a product based
on advertising expenditure.
5. Chi-square tests: This involves testing the independence or association between two
categorical variables. For example, testing whether gender and occupation are independent
variables.
6. Sampling techniques: This involves ensuring that the sample of data is representative of the
population. For example, using random sampling to select individuals from a population.
7. Bayesian statistics: This is an alternative approach to statistical inference that involves
updating beliefs about the probability of an event based on new evidence. For example,
updating the probability of a disease given a positive test result.

Types of Data

Measures of Central Tendency
A measure of central tendency is a statistical measure that represents a typical or central value for a
dataset. It provides a summary of the data by identifying a single value that is most representative
of the dataset as a whole.

Mean

The disadvantage of mean is that it is prone to getting skewed due to outliers. But, we have
been talking about algebraic mean. Geometric mean on the other hand responds relatively well
to outliers. It doesn’t get skewed as easily. Proneness to getting skewed needs to be
investigated for oher types of mean like Harmonic mean.

Median
Median sorts the data and the fact that outliers are relatively lower in number compared to
other regular data points, it (median) doesn’t get affected as much by outliers. In fact, by the
nature of outliers being extreme (i.e. they lie at ends/poles of sorted data) themselves implies
that it won’t affect median values. But, this same nature affects other extreme percentile values
(like 1st, 5th, 95th, 99th, etc. percentiles) very badly.

Mode
The mode is the value that appears most frequently in the dataset.

Weighted Mean
The weighted mean is the sum of the products of each value and its weight, divided by the sum
of the weights. It is used to calculate a mean when the values in the dataset have different
importance or frequency.

Example: A good example is calculating SGPA for all subjects in a semester. Since different
subjects may have different weightage points i.e. credits, you have to consider those weights
while calculating the mean.

Trimmed Mean
A trimmed mean is calculated by removing a certain percentage of the smallest and largest
values from the dataset and then taking the mean of the remaining values. The percentage of
values removed is called the trimming percentage.

Measures of Dispersion
A measure of dispersion is a statistical measure that describes the spread or variability of a dataset.
It provides information about how the data is distributed around the central tendency (mean,
median or mode) of the dataset. Consider the example where there are 3 data points ( -10, 0, 10 )
which has mean of 0. Another example of 5 data points ( -20, -5, 0, 5, 20 ) which have same mean of
0. here, even though the two samples have very different spread in the data, they have the same
mean. So, measure of central tendency alone can’t describe a sample. You also need measures of
dispersion.

Range
The range is the difference between the maximum and minimum values in the dataset. It is a
simple measure of dispersion that is easy to calculate but can be affected by outliers.

Variance
●

The variance is the average of the squared differences between each data point and the
mean. It measures the average distance of each data point from the mean and is useful in
comparing the dispersion of datasets with different means.

●

The purpose of squaring the distance is to make it positive so that opposite distances don’t
cancel out each other (i.e. we are concerned with magnitude of distance and not the
position of the data point from the mean). The downfall of using square of distance is this is
prone to getting skewed by outliers. Squaring it amplifies the skewness of outliers.

●

We could also have used modulus for this purpose, but squaring it is makes it continuous
which makes this usable in many other applications. The measure of dispersion that uses
modulus instead of squares is called Mean Absolute Deviation or MAD for short. MAD is
relatively less prone to getting skewed by outliers due to its power being 1.

●

Another sort of disadvantage of variance is that it gives the average spread in squared terms.
For example, if we were to calculate the variance for a random distribution of salary in LPA,
then variance would be in terms of LPA2. So, to solve this problem, we use Standard

Deviation.
● QUESTION: Why do we divide sample variance by (n-1) ?

Standard Deviation
The standard deviation is the square root of the variance. It is a widely used measure of
dispersion that is useful in describing the shape of a distribution.

Coefficient of Variation
The CV is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean expressed as a percentage. It is used
to compare the variability of datasets with different means and is commonly used in fields such
as biology, chemistry, and engineering.
The coefficient of variation (CV) is a statistical measure that expresses the amount of variability
in a dataset relative to the mean. It is a dimensionless quantity that is expressed as a
percentage.
The formula for calculating the coefficient of variation is:

CV = (standard deviation / mean) x 100%
The disadvantage of S.D. and Variance is we cannot directly compare those measures for
two different quantities/attributes due to different scales and units of those
quantities/attributes. For example, consider salary in LPA and subject marks. The marks may
have scale of upto 100s. But, the salary will definitely be less than 100. So, to compare their
spread, we use C.V. since it’s independent of scale (due to division by mean)

Graphs for Univariate Analysis
Categorical
Frequency Distribution Table And Cumulative Frequency
A frequency distribution table is a table that summarizes the number of times (or
frequency) that each value occurs in a dataset.

Relative frequency is the proportion or percentage of a category in a dataset or sample. It
is calculated by dividing the frequency of a category by the total number of observations in
the dataset or sample.

Cumulative frequency is the running total of frequencies of a variable or category in a
dataset or sample. It is calculated by adding up the frequencies of the current category and
all previous categories in the dataset or sample.
You can use Bar charts to plot frequency of categories.

Numerical
Frequency Distribution Table and Histogram
When plotting histograms, make sure that the number of bins or bin size is sufficient
enough.

Shapes of Histogram
The general types of histograms observed are:
●
●
●
●
●

Symmetric - the perfect bell curve/normal distribution
Bi-modal - 2 or more than two peaks
Left/Right skew - Histogram is skewed to one side
Uniform
Random/No pattern

Graphs for Bivariate analysis
Categorical - Categorical
Contingency Table/Crosstab
A contingency table, also known as a cross-tabulation or crosstab, is a type of table used in
statistics to summarize the relationship between two categorical variables. A contingency
table displays the frequencies or relative frequencies of the observed values of the two
variables, organized into rows and columns.

Numerical - Numerical
Scatter Plot

Percentiles and Quantiles
Quantiles
Quantiles are statistical measures used to divide a set of numerical data into equal-sized
groups, with each group containing an equal number of observations. Quantiles are important
measures of variability and can be used to: understand distribution of data, summarize and
compare different datasets. They can also be used to identify outliers.
There are several types of quantiles used in statistical analysis, including:
●

Quartiles: Divide the data into four equal parts, Q1 (25th percentile), Q2 (50th percentile or
median), and Q3 (75th percentile).

●

Deciles: Divide the data into ten equal parts, D1 (10th percentile), D2 (20th percentile), ..., D9
(90th percentile).

●

Percentiles: Divide the data into 100 equal parts, P1 (1st percentile), P2 (2nd percentile), ...,
P99 (99th percentile).

●

Quintiles: Divides the data into 5 equal parts

Things to remember while calculating these measures:
● Data should be sorted from low to high
● You are basically finding the location of an observation
● They are not actual values in the data
● All other tiles can be easily derived from Percentiles

Percentile
A percentile is a statistical measure that represents the percentage of observations in a dataset
that fall below a particular value. For example, the 75th percentile is the value below which 75%
of the observations in the dataset fall.
Formula to calculate the percentile value:

PL = p*(N+1)/100
where:
PL = the desired percentile value location
N = the total number of observations in the dataset
p = the percentile rank (expressed as a percentage)

Example:
Find the 75th percentile score from the below data:

78, 82, 84, 88, 91, 93, 94, 96, 98, 99
1.

After sorting the data and using the formula given, PL = 8.25 i.e. the 8.25th value/data
point represents the 75th percentile. But here, you obviously don’t or rather you can’t
have 8.25th point.
2. But, we do have the 8th and 9th points. We can interpolate the 8.25th value from that.
We assume a linear relationship between those points and calculate accordingly.
Since there is 0.25 after 8, we go a quarter from 8th value to the 9th value i.e. our
required value is a quarter distance from 96 and 98. Thus, our required value is 96.5
Ofcourse, this is because we have assumed a linear relationship between two successive
quantiles and since this is discrete data, we can do that. If this was continuous data defined
by a function, we would have used that function to calculate the percentiles instead of
assuming linear relationship.

Percentile rank = (X + 0.5*Y)*100/N

Or

X*100/N

X = number of values below the given value
Y = number of values equal to the given value
N = total number of values in the dataset

Example:
For the same data given in previous example, calculate the percentile rank of 96.5
1.

Using the first formula given above, we get percentile value of 80th percentile, which
is contradictory because, in the previous example, we calculated the 75th percentile
to be 96.5

So, as you can see, the two formulas (i.e. the percentile value and percentile rank) are not
reversible.

5 Number Summary
The five-number summary is a descriptive statistic that provides a summary of a dataset. It consists
of five values that divide the dataset into four equal parts, also known as quartiles.
The five-number summary includes the following values:

Minimum value: The smallest value in the dataset.
2. First quartile (Q1): The value that separates the lowest 25% of the data from the rest of the
1.

dataset.
3. Median (Q2): The value that separates the lowest 50% from the highest 50% of the data.

4. Third quartile (Q3): The value that separates the lowest 75% of the data from the highest
25% of the data.
5. Maximum value: The largest value in the dataset.
The five-number summary is often represented visually using a box plot, which displays the range
of the dataset, the median, and the quartiles. The five-number summary is a useful way to quickly
summarize the central tendency, variability, and distribution of a dataset.

Interquartile Range
The interquartile range (IQR) is a measure of variability based on a dataset's five-number
summary. Specifically, the IQR is defined as the difference between the third quartile (Q3) and
the first quartile (Q1) of a dataset.

Covariance
Covariance is a statistical measure that describes the degree to which two variables are linearly
related. It measures how much two variables change together, such that when one variable
increases, does the other variable also increase, or does it decrease?
●

If the covariance between two variables is positive, it means that the variables tend to move
together in the same direction.

●

If the covariance is negative, it means that the variables tend to move in opposite directions.

●

A covariance of zero indicates that the variables are not linearly related.

Calculation of Covariance

What problem does Covariance solve?
First, consider this example:
1. There are 2 datasets (-5, 0, 5) and (-20, 0, 20). The variance of these 2 data sets is the
same.
2. Consider another 2 datasets with more than 1 dimension [ (-1, -1), (0, 0), (1, 1) ] and [ (-1,
1), (0, 0), (1, -1) ]. The variance of these 2 data sets is the same.
So, variance alone can’t exactly describe the distribution or the relationship between
dimensions/features of the dataset. This is where covariance comes in.

Covariance gives a real number output. But, the magnitude itself doesn’t tell us about strength.
You only get a basic idea about strength. The sign tells us what the relation between those
attributes is.

Disadvantages of Covariance
One limitation of covariance is that it does not tell us about the strength of the relationship
between two variables, since the magnitude of covariance is affected by the scale of the
variables.
Also, it only tells us about the linear relationship between the variables.

Covariance of a variable with itself
In this case, if you use the formula, you will get the variance of that variable itself.

Correlation
●

Correlation refers to a statistical relationship between two or more variables. Specifically, it
measures the degree to which two variables are related and how they tend to change
together.

●

Correlation is often measured using a statistical tool called the correlation coefficient,
which ranges from -1 to 1. A correlation coefficient of -1 indicates a perfect negative
correlation, a correlation coefficient of 0 indicates no correlation, and a correlation
coefficient of 1 indicates a perfect positive correlation.

Here, σx is the standard deviation of variable ‘x’

Correlation and Causation
The phrase "correlation does not imply causation" means that just because two variables are
associated with each other, it does not necessarily mean that one causes the other. In other
words, a correlation between two variables does not necessarily imply that one variable is the
reason for the other variable's behavior.
Suppose there is a positive correlation between the number of firefighters present at a fire and
the amount of damage caused by the fire. One might be tempted to conclude that the presence
of firefighters causes more damage. However, this correlation could be explained by a third
variable - the severity of the fire. More severe fires might require more firefighters to be
present and also cause more damage.
Thus, while correlations can provide valuable insights into how different variables are related,
they cannot be used to establish causality. Establishing causality often requires additional
evidence such as experiments, randomized controlled trials, or well-designed observational
studies.

Other correlation coefficients
There are many other correlation coefficients like Pearson’s ‘r’.
You can find more at this article: www.scribbr.com/statistics/correlation-coefficient/
Also, in the same website, you will find other cool statistics related to data science:
www.scribbr.com/category/statistics/

Visualizing Multiple Variables
1. 3-D Scatter Plots
2. Hue parameters
3. Factegrids
You basically plot multiple graphs in 1 figure

4. Jointplots
Not technically a multi-dimensional graph. Used for 2-D. But, it’s something new.

5. Pairplots

6. Bubble plot

Random Variables
A Random Variable is a set of possible values from a random experiment.

Example: The sum of values on the upper faces of two dice when rolled together is a r.v. with a
Normal/Gaussian probability distribution function.
Random variables can be of 2 types:
1. Discrete r.v.
2. Continuous r.v.

Probability Distributions
A probability distribution is a list of all of the possible outcomes of a random variable along with
their corresponding probability values.

Problem with Distribution?
In many scenarios, the number of outcomes can be much larger, and hence a table would
be tedious to write down. Worse still, the number of possible outcomes could be infinite, in
which case, good luck writing a table for that.

Example - Height of people, Rolling 10 dice together
Solution - Function?
What if we use a mathematical function to model the relationship between outcome and
probability?

Note - A lot of time Probability Distribution and Probability Distribution Functions are
used interchangeably.

Types of Probability Distribution Functions (PDF)
1. Discrete
2. Continuous

Famous Distributions

Why are Probability Distributions important?
●
●

Gives an idea about the shape/distribution of the data.
And if our data follows a famous distribution then we automatically know a lot about the
data.

A note on Parameters
●
●

Parameters in probability distributions are numerical values that determine the shape,
location, and scale of the distribution.
Different probability distributions have different sets of parameters that determine their
shape and characteristics, and understanding these parameters is essential in statistical
analysis and inference.

Probability Distribution Function
A probability distribution function (PDF) is a mathematical function that describes the probability of
obtaining different values of a random variable in a particular probability distribution.
You can have 2 types of probability distribution functions based on whether it is continuous or
discrete:

Probability Mass Function (PMF) for discrete functions
2. Probability Density Function (PDF) for continuous functions
Both of these distribution functions have a Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) associated
1.

with them.

Probability Mass Function
It is a mathematical function that describes the probability distribution of a discrete random
variable. The PMF of a discrete random variable assigns a probability to each possible value of
the random variable. The probabilities assigned by the PMF must satisfy two conditions:
1. The probability assigned to each value must be non-negative (i.e., greater than or equal
to zero).
2. The sum of the probabilities assigned to all possible values must equal 1.

[Insert die roll function here]

Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) for a PMF
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) F(x) describes the probability that a random
variable X with a given probability distribution will be found at a value less than or equal to
x.
F(x) = P(X <= x)

Probability Density Function
PDF stands for Probability Density Function. It is a mathematical function that describes the
probability distribution of a continuous random variable.

Why is it probability density and not probability?

What does the area under the graph represent?
The

y-axis

represents

Probability Density with respect to the value of r.v.

(probability/r.v.) and the x-axis represents the value of r.v. So, when you take the area
under the graph, you are basically taking an integral w.r.t. x for the entire range of x. So, the
total area under the curve is 1 because all values of r.v. are independent, mutually exclusive,
and exhaustive. Since taking integral is basically summing the probabilities ( i.e. product of
density and value of r.v. ) which will total 1.
When you integrate the distribution function from 0 to x, you will get the CDF.

How to calculate Probability of a single value of r.v. ?
As discussed in the height of population example, you take the smallest interval around the
value you want and calculate the probability using the integral of probability density.

Density Estimation
Density estimation is a statistical technique used to estimate the probability density
function (PDF) of a random variable based on a set of observations or data. In simpler
terms, it involves estimating the underlying distribution of a set of data points.
Density estimation can be used for a variety of purposes, such as hypothesis testing, data
analysis, and data visualization. It is particularly useful in areas such as machine learning,
where it is often used to estimate the probability distribution of input data or to model the
likelihood of certain events or outcomes.
There are various methods for density estimation, including parametric and
non-parametric approaches. Parametric methods assume that the data follows a specific
probability distribution (such as a normal distribution), while non-parametric methods do
not make any assumptions about the distribution and instead, estimate it directly from the
data.
Commonly used techniques for density estimation include kernel density estimation (KDE),
histogram estimation, and Gaussian mixture models (GMMs). The choice of method
depends on the specific characteristics of the data and the intended use of the density
estimate.

Parametric Density Estimation
Parametric density estimation is a method of estimating the probability density function
(PDF) of a random variable by assuming that the underlying distribution belongs to a
specific parametric family of probability distributions, such as the normal, exponential, or
Poisson distributions.

Non - Parametric Density Estimation
But sometimes the distribution is not clear or it's not one of the famous distributions.
Non-parametric density estimation is a statistical technique used to estimate the
probability density function of a random variable without making any assumptions about
the underlying distribution. It is also referred to as non-parametric density estimation
because it does not require the use of a predefined probability distribution function, as
opposed to parametric methods such as the Gaussian distribution.

The non-parametric density estimation technique involves constructing an estimate of the
probability density function using the available data. This is typically done by creating a
kernel density estimate.
Non-parametric density estimation has several advantages over parametric density
estimation. One of the main advantages is that it does not require the assumption of a
specific distribution, which allows for more flexible and accurate estimation in situations
where the underlying distribution is unknown or complex. However, non-parametric
density estimation can be computationally intensive and may require more data to achieve
accurate estimates compared to parametric methods.
Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) is used for nn-parametric density estimation.

Kernel Density Estimation
Assume this example. you have 6 points. Plot a histogram to understand the distribution.

1.

First you choose a type of kernel (type of distribution). Generally, Gaussian/Normal
distribution is used.
2. You draw a Gaussian kernel for each point with that point as mean. you use a specific
S.D. ( which is called bandwidth in KDE ) for it. (explained later). The bandwidth
defines the smoothness/spikiness of the KDE plot/curve. Higher the bandwidth,
smoother and flatter the curve.
3. Then, for each point, you draw a (temporary) vertical line. Maybe that line will
intersect multiple kernels i.e. its own kernel and kernels of other points. You add the
y-values of those intersections to get the total y-value for that point.
4. Then you use some algorithm to get the curve equation of the KDE plot.
You can use SKlearn for KDE

How to use PDF in Data Science?
Consider the ‘Iris’ dataset. Our job is to classify a given data point into some species of the
‘iris’ flower. We have 4 attributes - sepal length and width, petal length and width. We want
to determine which of these attributes are more important or distinguishing?
Consider these PDFs:

From seeing these distributions, you can see that for petal_length and petal_width, the
distributions for different species are very apart from each other. Meaning, for a randomly
chosen petal_length or petal_width, there are more chances that you can confidently
correspond that chosen point to a certain species.
But, for sepal_length and sepal_width, the distributions are very overlapped. meaning, for
a randomly chosen sepal_width or sepal_length, there are less chances that we can
confidently correspond that chosen point to a certain species.
By simply visually analyzing the graphs, you can see the priority of degree of confidence
for the attributes being:

petal_width > petal_length > sepal_length > sepal_width

How to use CDF in Data Science?

Consider the same ‘Iris’ example and only the petal_width attribute.

Now, for a random chosen flower with petal_width of 1.6 (shown in red), if you check the
y-values , it intersects 2 CDFs those of versicolor and virginica. Which implies that there’s
non zero probability of the chosen flower being either versicolor or virginica.
Now, looking at the CDFs, you can see that for virginica, the y-value i.e. the probability (not
density since we are considering CDF) is approx 0.08. Whereas for versicolor, you can see
that the y-value i.e. probability is approx 0.9 which is way higher. This gives you insight and
confidence about classification of that flower.

Note:- Here, it is assumed that probability and percentile are used interchangeably i.e. 0.9
probability means 90% population below that point.
This is how CDF helps you.

How to use 2D Density Plots ?

The Hue depicts probability density. It’s basically a scatterplot converted/smoothened. If it
was a scatterplot, more points would have clustered in darker hues.

Normal Distribution
What is normal distribution?
Normal distribution, also known as Gaussian distribution, is a probability distribution that is
commonly used in statistical analysis. It is a continuous probability distribution that is
symmetrical around the mean, with a bell-shaped curve.
●
●
●

Tail
Asymptotic in nature
Lots of points near the mean and very few far away

The normal distribution is characterized by two parameters: the mean (μ) and the standard
deviation (σ). The mean represents the centre of the distribution, while the standard deviation
represents the spread of the distribution.
Denoted as:
X ~ N(mu, sigma)

Why is it so important?
Commonality in Nature
Many natural phenomena follow a normal distribution, such as the heights of people, the
weights of objects, the IQ scores of a population, and many more. Thus, the normal
distribution provides a convenient way to model and analyse such data.

PDF equation for Normal Distribution

Standard Normal Variate
A Standard Normal Variate(Z) is a standardized form of the normal distribution with mean =
0 and standard deviation = 1.
Standardizing a normal distribution allows us to compare different distributions with each
other, and to calculate probabilities using standardized tables or software.

PDF equation for Standard Normal Variate

Why Standardize data?
Short answer - convenience and standardization (obviously).
Long answer - standardization of data is important in feature engineering to standardize
all features i.e. the impact of a feature should be dependent on the feature itself and not its
scale. Standardization ensures that. Also, centering the data around mean keeps the values
grounded. Also, just like log tables for multiplication, you can use z-tables for normal
variates

How to Standardize data?

where, ni,new is the standardized value of the ith data point

Z-tables
Z-tables are analogous to log tables and are defined for standard normal variates.
For example, if you wanted to calculate the percentile rank of a data point, you would
integrate the normal function. Instead, you could standardize the data and use z-tables to
calculate pre-calculated values. (values can be pre-calculated because mean and S.D. of
data are predefined, duh!)
A z-table tells you the area underneath a normal distribution curve, to the left of the
z-score

Properties of Normal Distribution

Symmetricity
The normal distribution is symmetric about its mean, which means that the probability of
observing a value above the mean is the same as the probability of observing a value below
the mean. The bell-shaped curve of the normal distribution reflects this symmetry.

Measures of Central Tendencies are equal
mean = median = mode

Empirical Rule
The normal distribution has a well-known empirical rule, also called the 68-95-99.7 rule,
which states that approximately 68% of the data falls within one standard deviation of the
mean, about 95% of the data falls within two standard deviations of the mean, and about
99.7% of the data falls within three standard deviations of the mean.

Area under the curve
Area under the curve is obviously 1

CDF of Normal Distribution

Skewness
A normal distribution is a bell-shaped, symmetrical distribution with a specific mathematical
formula that describes how the data is spread out. Skewness indicates that the data is not
symmetrical, which means it is not normally distributed.
Skewness is a measure of the asymmetry of a probability distribution. It is a statistical measure that
describes the degree to which a dataset deviates from the normal distribution.
In a symmetrical distribution, the mean, median, and mode are all equal. In contrast, in a skewed
distribution, the mean, median, and mode are not equal, and the distribution tends to have a longer
tail on one side than the other.
Skewness can be positive, negative, or zero. A positive skewness means that the tail of the
distribution is longer on the right side, while a negative skewness means that the tail is longer on
the left side. A zero skewness indicates a perfectly symmetrical distribution.

Note:- Left skew means the tail is on the left side and the heap is on right side i.e. Negative skew

How is Skewness calculated?
3rd statistical moment formula:

3
𝑛
(𝑥 − 𝑥)
∑( 𝑠 )
(𝑛−1)(𝑛−2)
Where, n = no. of points in sample,
s = std of sample.

Statistical Moments
1. Mean
2. Standard deviation
3. Skewness
4. Kurtosis

Generally, as the rank of statistical moment increases, the power of x increases (Example: 1st
statistical moment i.e. mean, has power of x as 1. 3rd statistical moment i.e. skewness has power of
3.)

Kurtosis
Kurtosis is the 4th statistical moment. In probability theory and statistics, kurtosis (meaning
"curved, arching") is a measure of the "tailedness" of the probability distribution of a real-valued
random variable. Like skewness, kurtosis describes a particular aspect of a probability distribution.
Consider any 2 random distributions with the same mean, skew and standard deviation. Do you
think they will look the same? Think again! This is where kurtosis comes in:
<Insert Image>
Kurtosis is basically the degree of tail being fat i.e. the degree of frequency/density of “outliers”.
NOTE: Kurtosis is NOT degree of peakedness (degree of height or widths of peaks)

<Insert Image>

Practical use-case
In finance, kurtosis risk refers to the risk associated with the possibility of extreme outcomes
or "fat tails" in the distribution of returns of a particular asset or portfolio.
If a distribution has high kurtosis, it means that there is a higher likelihood of extreme events
occurring, either positive or negative, compared to a normal distribution.
In finance, kurtosis risk is important to consider because it indicates that there is a greater
probability of large losses or gains occurring, which can have significant implications for
investors. As a result, investors may want to adjust their investment strategies to account for
kurtosis risk.

Excess Kurtosis
Excess kurtosis is a measure of how much more peaked or flat a distribution is compared to a
normal distribution, which is considered to have a kurtosis of 0. It is calculated by subtracting 3
from the sample kurtosis coefficient.

Types of Kurtosis

Leptokurtic

A distribution with positive excess kurtosis is called leptokurtic. "Lepto-" means "slender".
In terms of shape, a leptokurtic distribution has fatter tails. This indicates that there are
more extreme values or outliers in the distribution.

Example - Assets with positive excess kurtosis are riskier and more volatile than those with
a normal distribution, and they may experience sudden price movements that can result in
significant gains or losses.

Platykurtic
A distribution with negative excess kurtosis is called platykurtic. "Platy-'' means "broad". In
terms of shape, a platykurtic distribution has thinner tails. This indicates that there are
fewer extreme values or outliers in the distribution.
Assets with negative excess kurtosis are less risky and less volatile than those with normal
distribution, and they may experience more gradual price movements that are less likely to
result in large gains or losses.

Mesokurtic
Distributions with zero excess kurtosis are called mesokurtic. The most prominent
example of a mesokurtic distribution is the normal distribution family, regardless of the
values of its parameters.
Mesokurtic is a term used to describe a distribution with an excess kurtosis of 0, indicating
that it has the same degree of "peakedness" or "flatness" as a normal distribution.
Example - In finance, a mesokurtic distribution is considered to be the ideal distribution of
assets or portfolios, as it represents a balance between risk and return.

QQ Plot
How to find if a given distribution is normal or not?

Visual Inspection:
One of the easiest ways to check for normality is to visually inspect a histogram or a
density plot of the data. A normal distribution has a bell-shaped curve, which means that

the majority of the data falls in the middle, and the tails taper off symmetrically. If the
distribution looks approximately bell-shaped, it is likely to be normal.

QQ Plot:
Another way to check for normality is to create a normal probability plot (also known as a
Q-Q plot) of the data. A normal probability plot plots the observed data against the
expected values of a normal distribution. If the data points fall along a straight line, the
distribution is likely to be normal.

Statistical Tests:
There are several statistical tests that can be used to test for normality, such as the
Shapiro-Wilk test, the Anderson-Darling test, and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. These
tests compare the observed data to the expected values of a normal distribution and
provide a p-value that indicates whether the data is likely to be normal or not. A p-value
less than the significance level (usually 0.05) suggests that the data is not normal.

What is a QQ Plot and how is it plotted?
A QQ plot (quantile-quantile plot) is a graphical tool used to assess the similarity of the
distribution of two sets of data. It is particularly useful for determining whether a set of data
follows a normal distribution.
In a QQ plot, the quantiles of the two sets of data are plotted against each other. The quantiles
of one set of data are plotted on the x-axis, while the quantiles of the other set of data are
plotted on the y-axis. If the two sets of data have the same distribution, the points on the QQ
plot will fall on a straight line. If the two sets of data do not have the same distribution, the
points will deviate from the straight line.

Uniform distribution

What is Uniform Distribution and its types?
In probability theory and statistics, a uniform distribution is a probability distribution where all
outcomes are equally likely within a given range. This means that if you were to select a random
value from this range, any value would be as likely as any other value.
Types
Denoted as
Examples
●
●
●
●

The height of a person randomly selected from a group of individuals whose height range
from 5'6" to 6'0" would follow a continuous uniform distribution.
The time it takes for a machine to produce a product, where the production timeranges
from 5 to 10 minutes, would follow a continuous uniform distribution.
The distance that a randomly selected car travels on a tank of gas, where the distance
ranges from 300 to 400 miles, would follow a continuous uniform distribution.
The weight of a randomly selected apple from a basket of apples that weighs between 100
and 200 grams, would follow a continuous uniform distribution.

Application in Machine Learning and Data Science
Random initialization: In many machine learning algorithms, such as neural networks and
k-means clustering, the initial values of the parameters can have a significant impact on the
final result. Uniform distribution is often used to randomly initialize the parameters, as it
ensures that all values in the range have an equal probability of being selected.
Sampling: Uniform distribution can also be used for sampling. For example, if you have a
dataset with an equal number of samples from each class, you can use uniform distribution to
randomly select a subset of the data that is representative of all the classes.
Data augmentation: In some cases, you may want to artificially increase the size of your dataset
by generating new examples that are similar to the original data. Uniform distribution can be
used to generate new data points that are within a specified range of the original data.
Hyperparameter tuning: Uniform distribution can also be used in hyperparameter tuning,
where you need to search for the best combination of hyperparameters for a machine learning
model. By defining a uniform prior distribution for each hyperparameter, you can sample from
the distribution to explore the hyperparameter space.

Log Normal Distribution
In probability theory and statistics, a lognormal distribution is a heavy tailed continuous probability
distribution of a random variable whose logarithm is normally distributed.
Examples
●
●
●

The length of comments posted in Internet discussion forums follows a log-normal
distribution.
Users' dwell time on online articles (jokes, news etc.) follows a log-normal distribution.
The length of chess games tends to follow a log-normal distribution.In economics, there is
evidence that the income of 97% - 99% of the population is distributed log-normally.

Pareto Distribution
Pareto Distribution
The Pareto distribution is a type of probability distribution that is commonly used to model the
distribution of wealth, income, and other quantities that exhibit a similar power-law behavior.

What is Power Law?
In mathematics, a power law is a functional relationship between two variables, where one
variable is proportional to the power of the other. Specifically, if y and x are two variables
related by a power law, then the relationship can be written as:
y = k * x^a
Vilfredo Pareto originally used this distribution to describe the allocation of wealth among
individuals since it seemed to show rather well the way that a larger portion of the wealth of
any society is owned by a smaller percentage of the people in that society. He also used it to
describe the distribution of income. This idea is sometimes expressed more simply as the

Pareto principle or the "80-20 rule" which says that 20% of the population controls 80% of the
wealth.

Graph & Parameters

Examples
The sizes of human settlements (few cities, many hamlets/villages) File size distribution of
Internet traffic which uses the TCP protocol (many smaller files, few larger ones)

Bernoulli Distribution
Bernoulli distribution is a probability distribution that models a binary outcome, where the
outcome can be either success (represented by the value 1) or failure (represented by the value 0).
The Bernoulli distribution is named after the Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli, who first
introduced it in the late 1600s.
The Bernoulli distribution is characterized by a single parameter, which is the probability of
success, denoted by p. The probability mass function (PMF) of the Bernoulli distribution is:
The Bernoulli distribution is commonly used in machine learning for modeling binary outcomes,
such as whether a customer will make a purchase or not, whether an email is spam or not, or
whether a patient will have a certain disease or not.

Binomial Distribution
Binomial distribution is a probability distribution that describes the number of successes in a fixed
number of independent Bernoulli trials with two possible outcomes (often called "success" and
"failure"), where the probability of success is constant for each trial. The binomial distribution is
characterized by two parameters: the number of trials n and the probability of success p.

Criteria:
The process consists of n trials only 2 exclusive outcomes are possible, a success and a failure.
P(success) = p and P(failure) = 1-p and it is fixed from trial to trialThe trials are independent.

Binary classification problems:
In binary classification problems, we often model the probability of an event happening as a
binomial distribution. For example, in a spam detection system, we may model the
probability of an email being spam or not spam using a binomial distribution.

Hypothesis testing:
In statistical hypothesis testing, we use the binomial distribution to calculate the
probability of observing a certain number of successes in a given number of trials,
assuming a null hypothesis is true. This can be used to make decisions about whether a
certain hypothesis is supported by the data or not.

Logistic regression:
Logistic regression is a popular machine learning algorithm used for classification
problems. It models the probability of an event happening as a logistic function of the input
variables. Since the logistic function can be viewed as a transformation of a linear
combination of inputs, the output of logistic regression can be thought of as a binomial
distribution.

A/B testing:
A/B testing is a common technique used to compare two different versions of a product,
web page, or marketing campaign. In A/B testing, we randomly assign individuals to one of
two groups and compare the outcomes of interest between the groups. Since the outcomes
are often binary (e.g., click- through rate or conversion rate), the binomial distribution can
be used to model the distribution of outcomes and test for differences between the groups.

Sampling Distribution
Sampling distribution is a probability distribution that describes the statistical properties of a
sample statistic (such as the sample mean or sample proportion) computed from multiple
independent samples of the same size from a population.

Why Sampling Distribution is important?
Sampling distribution is important in statistics and machine learning because it allows us to
estimate the variability of a sample statistic, which is useful for making inferences about the
population. By analyzing the properties of the sampling distribution, we can compute
confidence intervals, perform hypothesis tests, and make predictions about the population
based on the sample data.

The Central Limit Theorem
The Central Limit Theorem (CLT) states that the distribution of the sample means of a large number
of independent and identically distributed random variables will approach a normal distribution,
regardless of the underlying distribution of the variables.
The conditions required for the CLT to hold are:
1. The sample size is large enough, typically greater than or equal to 30.
2. The sample is drawn from a finite population or an infinite population with a finite variance.
3. The random variables in the sample are independent and identically distributed.
The CLT is important in statistics and machine learning because it allows us to make probabilistic
inferences about a population based on a sample of data. For example, we can use the CLT to
construct confidence intervals, perform hypothesis tests, and make predictions about the
population mean based on the sample data. The CLT also provides a theoretical justification for
many commonly used statistical techniques, such as t-tests, ANOVA, and linear regression.

Case Study - What is the average income of Indians
Step-by-step process:

1.

Collect multiple random samples of salaries from a representative group of Indians. Each
sample should be large enough (usually, n > 30) to ensure the CLT holds. Make sure the
samples are representative and unbiased to avoid skewed results.

2. Calculate the sample mean (average salary) and sample standard deviation for each sample.
3. Calculate the average of the sample means. This value will be your best estimate of the
population mean (average salary of all Indians).
4. Calculate the standard error of the sample means, which is the standard deviation of the
sample means divided by the square root of the number of samples.
5. Calculate the confidence interval around the average of the sample means to get a range
within which the true population mean likely falls. For a 95% confidence interval:
lower_limit = average_sample_means - 1.96 * standard_error
upper_limit = average_sample_means + 1.96 * standard_error
6. Report the estimated average salary and the confidence interval.

Remember that the validity of your results depends on the quality of your data and the
representativeness of your samples. To obtain accurate results, it's crucial to ensure that your
samples are unbiased and representative.

Population Vs Sample
Population
A population is the entire group or set of individuals, objects, or events that are searcher wants
to study or draw conclusions about. It can be people, animals, plants, or even inanimate objects,
depending on the context of the study. The population usually represents the complete set of
possible data points or observations.

Sample
A sample is a subset of the population that is selected for study. It is a smaller group that is
intended to be representative of the larger population. Researchers collect data from the
sample and use it to make inferences about the population as a whole. Since it is often

impractical or impossible to collect data from every member of a population, samples are used
as an efficient and cost-effective way to gather information.

Parameter Vs Estimate/Statistic
Parameter
A parameter is a numerical value that describes a characteristic of a population.Parameters are
usually denoted using Greek letters, such as μ (mu) for the population mean orσ (sigma) for the
population standard deviation. Since it is often difficult or impossible to obtain data from an
entire population, parameters are usually unknown and must be estimated based on available
sample data.

Statistic
A statistic is a numerical value that describes a characteristic of a sample, which is a subset of
the population. By using statistics calculated from a representative sample,researchers can
make inferences about the unknown respective parameter of the population. Common
statistics include the sample mean (denoted by , pronounced "x-bar"), the sample median, and
the sample standard deviation (denoted by s).

Inferential Statistics
Inferential statistics is a branch of statistics that focuses on making predictions, estimations, or
generalizations about a larger population based on a sample of data taken from that population. It
involves the use of probability theory to make inferences and draw conclusions about the
characteristics of a population by analysing a smaller subset or sample.
The key idea behind inferential statistics is that it is often impractical or impossible to collect data
from every member of a population, so instead, we use a representative sample to make inferences
about the entire group. Inferential statistical techniques include hypothesis testing,confidence
intervals, and regression analysis, among others.
These methods help researchers answer questions like:
● Is there a significant difference between two groups?
● Can we predict the outcome of a variable based on the values of other variables?

●

What is the relationship between two or more variables?Inferential statistics are widely used
in various fields, such as economics, social sciences,medicine, and natural sciences, to make
informed decisions and guide policy based on limited data.

Point Estimate
A point estimate is a single value, calculated from a sample, that serves as the best guess or
approximation for an unknown population parameter, such as the mean or standard deviation.
Point estimates are often used in statistics when we want to make inferences about a population
based on a sample.
Example:
● Consider a Youtuber with 100k subscribers and wants to calculate the
mean/std/median/<any statistic> of his subscribers. He/she can’t realistically collect the
age of all his subscribers. Instead he, may take a sample (collecting the age values for those
subscribers who are attending a certain live class) and calculate the mean/std/<any
statistic>
● To maybe increase the accuracy of this guesstimate, he may take these samples for a lot of
his classes (assuming at least some students to be different in each class for proper
representation of population (we don’t want bias now, do we?)) and then calculate the
means/std/<any statistic> for all of them AND then, computing the same statistic on all the
computed statistics. It’s like calling the same function on all levels of a tree.
The question is; is this value reliable? Or rather… How reliable is this value? (These are two different
questions with different implications)

Parametric vs Non parametric tests
Parametric Tests
Parametric tests are a family of statistical tests that assume the sample data comes from a
population that follows a probability distribution based on a fixed set of parameters. These
tests are powerful and efficient but require certain conditions to be met:
●

Assumption of Normality: The data should follow a normal (Gaussian) distribution.

●

●

Interval or Ratio Scale: The data should be measured on an interval or ratio scale, meaning
it's quantitative and possesses the properties of order, equal intervals, and a natural zero
point.
Homogeneity of Variances: The variance among the groups being compared should be
approximately equal.

Because of these assumptions, when conditions are met, parametric tests can provide more
accurate and specific outcomes. Common examples include the t-test (used to compare the
means of two groups) and the ANOVA (used to compare the means among three or more
groups).

Non-Parametric Tests
Non-parametric tests, on the other hand, do not assume your data comes from a specific
distribution. These tests are more flexible and are used when the assumptions for parametric
tests are not met. They can be applied to ordinal data (data that can be ranked but not
measured numerically) or when the sample size is too small to determine the distribution. The
key features include:
●
●
●

No Assumption of Distribution: They do not require the data to follow a normal distribution.
Different Types of Data: They are suitable for ordinal, nominal, and interval/ratio data that
doesn't meet the assumptions of normality.
Robustness: They are more robust to outliers and the shape of the data distribution.

However, non-parametric tests are generally less powerful than parametric tests, meaning if
the parametric test assumptions are met, a parametric test could potentially provide a more
precise outcome. Examples include the Mann-Whitney U test (a non-parametric alternative to
the t-test for two groups) and the Kruskal-Wallis test (a non-parametric alternative to ANOVA).
In summary, the choice between parametric and non-parametric tests hinges on the nature of your
data and whether the assumptions required for parametric tests are met. If your data adheres to
these assumptions, parametric tests can offer more strength and precision. However, when these
conditions aren't satisfied, non-parametric tests provide a reliable alternative for analyzing your
data.

Confidence Interval
Confidence interval, in simple words, is a range of values within which we expect a particular
population parameter, like a mean, to fall. It's a way to express the uncertainty around an estimate

obtained from a sample of data. Confidence level, usually expressed as a percentage like 95%,
indicates how sure we are that the true value lies within the interval.
Confidence Interval = [ Point Estimate + Margin of Error, Point Estimate - Margin of Error ]
Ways to calculate CI:
1. z-procedure (also known as Sigmna Known) ( used when std of POPULATION is known,
which is rare)
2. t-procedure
Confidence Interval is created for Parameters and not statistics. Statistics help us get the
confidence interval for a parameter.

Confidence Interval (Sigma Known) (Z procedure)

Assumptions
1. Random sampling: The data must be collected using a random sampling method to
ensure that the sample is representative of the population. This helps to minimize biases
and ensures that the results can be generalized to the entire population.
2. Known population standard deviation: The population standard deviation (σ) must be
known or accurately estimated. In practice, the population standard deviation is often
unknown, and the sample standard deviation (s) is used as an estimate. However, if the
sample size is large enough, the sample standard deviation can provide a reasonably
accurate approximation.
3. Normal distribution or large sample size: The Z-procedure assumes that the underlying
population is normally distributed. However, if the population distribution is not normal,
the Central Limit Theorem can be applied when the sample size is large (usually, sample
size n ≥ 30 is considered large enough). According to the Central Limit Theorem, the
sampling distribution of the sample mean will approach a normal distribution as the sample
size increases, regardless of the shape of the population distribution.

Now, for that mysterious alpha/2 part in the equation:
(1 - alpha) is the the confidence level.

Therefore, alpha = 0.025 if we assume CI as 95%.
Now, what does this get us? Well, look at the below image. The area shaded is (1-alpha) and
represents the probability (in our case, confidence) that the value we assume is correct. Now,
by symmetry, the other areas (probabilities) are alpha/2.
We want the value of x (x-axis) that gives (alpha/2) probability or area. We can simply find it
using a z-table. In our case, for (alpha/2 = 0.025), we get the x-value as -2. But, we consider
only the magnitude right now, because the mean is at center. So, the value will be 2 for Z.

Interpreting Confidence Intervals
A confidence interval is a range of values within which a population parameter, such as the
population mean, is estimated to lie with a certain level of confidence. The confidence interval
provides an indication of the precision and uncertainty associated with the estimate. To
interpret the confidence interval values, consider the following points: Confidence level: The
confidence level (commonly set at 90%, 95%, or 99%) represents the probability that the
confidence interval will contain the true population parameter if the sampling and estimation
process were repeated multiple times. For example, a 95% confidence interval means that if you
were to draw 100 different samples from the population and calculate the confidence interval
for each, approximately 95 of those intervals would contain the true population parameter.
Let’s take another example. Let’s take the age of all people in the entire world. I want to
calculate its mean. Now, obviously, this mean has a definite value because the population is
finite and age values are discrete. But, it’s impossible to actually measure the age of all people in
the world. So, we take samples! We do some CLT magic and get a PDF (sampling distribution).
Alas! This is a continuous curve. We expected a discrete value! It’s a classic case of probability
density vs probability. So… we assume an interval. Now, the precision actually depends on us.
We could go with 99% or.. 99.99% or 99.999% and on and on and on… This is exactly the
confidence level we were talking about.

Confidence level
The confidence level (commonly set at 90%, 95%, or 99%) represents the probability that
the confidence interval will contain the true population parameter if the sampling and
estimation process were repeated multiple times. For example, a 95% confidence interval
means that if you were to draw 100 different samples from the population and calculate the
confidence interval for each, approximately 95 of those intervals would contain the true
population parameter.

Interval range
The width of the confidence interval gives an indication of the precision of the estimate. A
narrower confidence interval suggests a more precise estimate of the population
parameter, while a wider interval indicates greater uncertainty. The width of the interval
depends on the sample size, variability in the data, and the desired level of confidence.

Interpretation
To interpret the confidence interval values, you can say that you are "X% confident that the
true population parameter lies within the range (lower limit, upper limit)." Keep in mind
that this statement is about the interval, not the specific point estimate, and it refers to the
confidence level you chose when constructing the interval.

●

●

●

Generally, Confidence intervals and confidence level are sort of inversely proportional if
other factors are kept constant. For example, 100% isn’t theoretically possible, because that
will be like a single point in the PDF having probability that doesn’t approach zero.
As Confidence level decreases, you can reduce the range of the interval. For example, if
someone asks with how much confidence can you say that Rohit/Virat will make between
97-102 runs, I would say it with low confidence because the interval is very small. But, if
someone asks with how much confidence can you say that Rohit/Virat will score between 0
and 500 in an T20 match, I would say 100%. because those are the theoretical limits of runs
that can be scored in a match.
So, generally, as you approach 100% confidence level, your confidence interval expands to its
theoretical limits (-inf, +inf)

What is the trade-off ?

Factors Affecting Margin of Error

Confidence Level (1-alpha)
●
●
●
●

Okay, so from the formula, you can easily see the relationship between CL and Margin
of Error.
It’s proportional (non-linear)
As the CL increases, alpha decreases and hence Z also decreases which makes the
margin of error smaller. And vice versa.
You can observe this relationship in the graph below.

Sample Size
Well, from the formula, you can see the inverse proportionality.

As you see, there’s a significant drop in MoE as sample size increases initially, but that drop
gets stagnated with further increase in sample size. So, it’s a trade-off. After a sample size
of 30, increasing the sample size will only get you slightly better MoE. So, generally,

Population Standard Deviation
From the formula, you can see linear direct proportionality from the formula.

Disadvantages of z-procedure
The main drawback is the critical assumption that the population std is known. That is rarely
seen in real life.

Confidence Interval (Sigma Not Known)
t-procedure shines when population std is not known and/or the sample sizes used are too
low.

Assumptions

1. Random sampling: The data must be collected using a random sampling method to
ensure that the sample is representative of the population. This helps to minimize biases
and ensures that the results can be generalized to the entire population.
2. Sample standard deviation: The population standard deviation (σ) is unknown, and the
sample standard deviation (s) is used as an estimate. The t-distribution is specifically
designed to account for the additional uncertainty introduced by using the sample
standard deviation instead of the population standard deviation.
3. Approximately normal distribution: The t-procedure assumes that the underlying
population is approximately normally distributed, or the sample size is large enough for the
Central Limit Theorem to apply. If the population distribution is heavily skewed or has
extreme outliers, the t-procedure may not be accurate, and non-parametric methods
should be considered.
● If the distribution is not normal, then the sample size must be high for CLT to be
applied.
● But, if the distribution is normal, then smaller sample sizes are allowed (and this is
where t-procedure shines)
3. Independent observations: The observations in the sample should be independent of each
other. In other words, the value of one observation should not influence the value of
another observation. This is particularly important when working with time series data or
data with inherent dependencies.

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

We don’t have population std, so we have to use sample std. This is where the complexity
arrives. Because a single sample’s std might not be obviously close to population std.
So, what can we do? We can use the Central Limit Theorem (Duhh!!) But, it can only be used
if the sample size is large enough. If not, we will have to use something else.
Since we are using sample std instead of population std, we get a new distribution student’s t-distribution. This is a theoretical and artificial distribution. It doesn’t exist in real
life. It's a synthetic distribution. You won’t observe it in nature.
It is given by degrees of freedom i.e. (n-1)
As sample size (n) approaches infinity (assuming population to be infinite), df also
approaches infinity and the student’s t-distribution approaches a normal distribution.
Which is intuitive, because if sample size = population size, we would basically be
calculating population std.
So, in the Conf Int formula, we use sample std instead of population std. Also, we use T at
(alpha/2) instead of Z at (alpha/2)
Also, generally for the same Conf Level, T at (alpha/2) is higher than Z at (alpha/2), which is
also intuitive because for a lower degree of freedom, there is more uncertainty.
We use t-table instead of z-table for this purpose.

Student's t Distribution
Student's t-distribution, or simply the t-distribution, is a probability distribution that arises
when estimating the mean of a normally distributed population when the sample size is small
and the population standard deviation is unknown. It was introduced by William Sealy Gosset,
who published under the pseudonym "Student."
The t-distribution is similar to the normal distribution (also known as the Gaussian distribution
or the bell curve) but has heavier tails. The shape of the t-distribution is determined by the
degrees of freedom, which is closely related to the sample size (degrees of freedom = sample
size - 1). As the degrees of freedom increase (i.e., as the sample size increases), the
t-distribution approaches the normal distribution.
In hypothesis testing and confidence interval estimation, the t-distribution is used in place of
the normal distribution when the sample size is small (usually less than 30) and the population
standard deviation is unknown. The t-distribution accounts for the additional uncertainty that
arises from estimating the population standard deviation using the sample standard deviation.
To use the t-distribution in practice, you look up critical t-values from a t-distribution table,
which provides values corresponding to specific degrees of freedom and confidence levels (e.g.,
95% confidence). These critical t-values are then used to calculate confidence intervals or
perform hypothesis tests.

Hypothesis Testing
A statistical hypothesis test is a method of statistical inference used to decide whether the data at
hand sufficiently support a particular hypothesis. Hypothesis testing allows us to make probabilistic
statements about population parameters.

Null and Alternate Hypothesis
1. Null hypothesis (H0): In simple terms, the null hypothesis is a statement that assumes there is
no significant effect or relationship between the variables being studied. It serves as the
starting point for hypothesis testing and represents the status quo or the assumption of no
effect until proven otherwise. The purpose of hypothesis testing is to gather evidence (data) to
either reject or fail to reject the null hypothesis in favor of the alternative hypothesis, which
claims there is a significant effect or relationship.
Note: Failing to reject Null Hypothesis doesn’t prove the equivalence of the two hypotheses.
Consider a Null Hypothesis H0: Drug A and Drug B are indifferent in terms of effectiveness.
These drugs may have different working mechanisms, chemical and physical structures, etc.
But, if they are equally effective, that doesn’t mean Drug A and Drug B are the same.
2. Alternative hypothesis (H1 or Ha): The alternative hypothesis, is a statement that contradicts
the null hypothesis and claims there is a significant effect or relationship between the variables
being studied. It represents the research hypothesis or the claim that the researcher wants to
support through statistical analysis.
Important Points
●

How to decide what will be Null hypothesis and what will be Alternate Hypothesis(Typically
the Null hypothesis says nothing new is happening)

●

We try to gather evidence to reject the null hypothesis

●

It's important to note that failing to reject the null hypothesis doesn't necessarily mean that
the null hypothesis is true; it just means that there isn't enough evidence to support the
alternative hypothesis.

●

Hypothesis tests are similar to jury trials, in a sense. In a jury trial, H0 is similar to the
not-guilty verdict, and Ha is the guilty verdict. You assume in a jury trial that the defendant
isn’t guilty unless the prosecution can show beyond a reasonable doubt that he or she is

guilty. If the jury says the evidence is beyond a reasonable doubt, they reject H0, not guilty,
in favor of Ha , guilty.

Steps involved in Hypothesis Testing
There are two ways in which Hypothesis testing is generally done:
1. Rejection region approach
2. p-value approach

Rejection Region Approach
1. Formulate a Null and Alternate hypothesis
2. Select a significance level
● This is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is actually true, usually
set at 0.05 or 0.01.
● You can call it the acceptable threshold.
● 0.05 significance level means out of 100 trials, it is tolerable that upto 5 trials don’t
support the given hypothesis.
● significance level is sort of the opposite of confidence level
● Remember the (alpha) term in z-procedure? Yeah! That’s significant level!
3. Check assumptions:
A. Type of distribution
B. Do you have population parameters or not?
C. Is the data numeric, categoric, ordinal, mixed, etc?
D. etc.
4. Decide which test is appropriate (Z-test, T-test, Chi-square test, ANOVA)
5. State the relevant test statistic (example: z-score for Z-test, t-statistic for T-test, etc)
6. Conduct the test
7. Reject or not reject the Null Hypothesis (based on the obtained value of relevant test
statistic)
8. Interpret the result

Performing a z-test

Example: Suppose a company is evaluating the impact of a new training program on the
productivity of its employees. The company has data on the average productivity of its
employees before implementing the training program. The average productivity was 50
units per day with a known population standard deviation of 5 units. After implementing
the training program, the company measures the productivity of a random sample of 30
employees. The sample has an average productivity of 53 units per day. The company wants
to know if the new training program has significantly increased productivity.

Example: Suppose a snack food company claims that their Lays wafer packets contain an
average weight of 50 grams per packet. To verify this claim, a consumer watchdog
organization decides to test a random sample of Lays wafer packets. The organization
wants to determine whether the actual average weight differs significantly from the
claimed 50 grams. The organization collects a random sample of 40 Lays wafer packets and
measures their weights. They find that the sample has an average weight of 49 grams, with
a known population standard deviation of 4 grams.

Rejection Region
Significance level - denoted as α (alpha), is a predetermined threshold used in hypothesis
testing to determine whether the null hypothesis should be rejected or not. It represents
the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is actually true, also known as Type
1 error.
The critical region is the region of values that corresponds to the rejection of the null
hypothesis at some chosen probability level.

Problem with Rejection Region Approach
●
●

●

●

●
●

Assume a hypothesis test using z-test. We are considering a significance level of 0.05.
And we are using a two-tailed test.
Assuming a Normal distribution, the critical values for this test is 1.96 (from z-table).
Thus, for us to reject the null hypothesis, the z-score must be greater than 1.96 or
less than -1.96.
If we get a z-score as 1.97 (>1.96) we can successfully reject the null hypothesis. But,
look at it. The z-score is just 0.01 greater than the critical value. That’s a very small
margin. There’s no buffer zone.
If we get a z-score of 3.5 (>>1.96) we can also successfully reject the null hypothesis.
In this case, the margin is very high. But, there the measure of how high the margin is
didn’t affect our rejecting the Null hypothesis.
Herein lies the problem. We don’t have a perfect way to express our confidence with
which we are rejecting the null hypothesis.
For this reason, the rejection region approach isn’t used generally. p-value test is
preferred.

Type 1 and Type 2 Error
In hypothesis testing, there are two types of errors that can occur when making a decision
about the null hypothesis: Type I error and Type II error

.

Type-I (False Positive)
Error occurs when the sample results lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis when it is
in fact true.
Example: Consider a two tailed z-test with significance level of 0.05. Thus the critical
regions will be greater than 1.96 or less than -1.96. Assume that in this case, we need to fail
to reject the null hypothesis i.e. we know that the null hypothesis is true. But even then we
get a z-score that lies in the critical region, which will lead to rejection of the hypothesis.
This is a False positive. We could potentially change this result by changing the significance
level to 0.01 thus reducing the critical region, which would decrease the possibility of the
z-score lying in the rejection/critical region.
In other words, it's the mistake of finding a significant effect or relationship when there is
none. The probability of committing a Type I error is denoted by α (alpha), which is also
known as the significance level. By choosing a significance level, researchers can control
the risk of making a Type I error.

Type-II (False Negative)
Error occurs when based on the sample results, the null hypothesis is not rejected when it
is in fact false.
Example: Consider a two tailed z-test with significance level of 0.05. Thus the critical
regions will be greater than 1.96 or less than -1.96. Assume that in this case, we need to
reject the null hypothesis i.e. we know that the null hypothesis is false. But even then we
get a z-score that doesn’t lie in the critical region, which will lead to failure of rejection of
the hypothesis.

This is a False Negative. We could potentially change this result by changing the
significance level to 0.1 thus increasing the critical region, which would increase the
possibility of the z-score lying in the rejection/critical region.
This means that the researcher fails to detect a significant effect or relationship when one
actually exists. The probability of committing a Type II error is denoted by β (beta).

Trade-off between Type 1 and Type 2 errors
As you saw, type 1 and type 2 errors are sort of opposite to each other. Hence, there needs
to be a sweet spot or a sweet compromise that we need to make to choose the optimum
value for a critical region.
It depends on the case/situation. You need to decide whether type 1 or type 2 error needs
to be prioritically minimum.

One sided/tailed vs. Two sided/tailed Test

One-sided (one-tailed) test
A one-sided test is used when the researcher is interested in testing the effect in a specific
direction (either greater than or less than the value specified in the null hypothesis). The
alternative hypothesis in a one-sided test contains an inequality (either ">" or "<").

Example: A researcher wants to test whether a new medication increases the average
recovery rate compared to the existing medication.

Advantages:
1. More powerful: One-tailed tests are generally more powerful than two-tailed tests, as the
entire significance level (α) is allocated to one tail of the distribution. This means that the
test is more likely to detect an effect in the specified direction, assuming the effect exists.
2. Directional hypothesis: One-tailed tests are appropriate when there is a strong
theoretical or practical reason to test for an effect in a specific direction.

Disadvantages:
1. Missed effects: One-tailed tests can miss effects in the opposite direction of the specified
alternative hypothesis. If an effect exists in the opposite direction, the test will not be able
to detect it, which could lead to incorrect conclusions.
2. Increased risk of Type I error: One-tailed tests can be more prone to Type I errors if the
effect is actually in the opposite direction than the one specified in the alternative
hypothesis.

Two-sided (two-tailed) test
A two-sided test is used when the researcher is interested in testing the effect in both
directions (i.e., whether the value specified in the null hypothesis is different, either greater
or lesser). The alternative hypothesis in a two-sided test contains a "not equal to" sign (≠).

Example: A researcher wants to test whether a new medication has a different average
recovery rate compared to the existing medication.
The main difference between them lies in the directionality of the alternative hypothesis
and how the significance level is distributed in the critical regions.

Advantages:

1. Detects effects in both directions: Two-tailed tests can detect effects in both directions,
which makes them suitable for situations where the direction of the effect is uncertain or
when researchers want to test for any difference between the groups or variables.
2. More conservative: Two-tailed tests are more conservative because the significance level
(α) is split between both tails of the distribution. This reduces the risk of Type I errors in
cases where the direction of the effect is uncertain.

Disadvantages:
1. Less powerful: Two-tailed tests are generally less powerful than one-tailed tests because
the significance level (α) is divided between both tails of the distribution. This means the
test requires a larger effect size to reject the null hypothesis, which could lead to a higher
risk of Type II errors (failing to reject the null hypothesis when it is false).
2. Not appropriate for directional hypotheses: Two-tailed tests are not ideal for cases where
the research question or hypothesis is directional, as they test for differences in both
directions, which may not be of interest or relevance.

Where can Hypothesis be applied ?
1. Testing the effectiveness of interventions or treatments: Hypothesis testing can be used to
determine whether a new drug, therapy, or educational intervention has a significant effect
compared to a control group or an existing treatment.
2. Comparing means or proportions: Hypothesis testing can be used to compare means or
proportions between two or more groups to determine if there's a significant difference. This
can be applied to compare average customer satisfaction scores, conversion rates, or employee
performance across different groups.
3. Analyzing relationships between variables: Hypothesis testing can be used to evaluate the
association between variables, such as the correlation between age and income or the
relationship between advertising spend and sales.
4. Evaluating the goodness of fit: Hypothesis testing can help assess if a particular theoretical
distribution (e.g., normal, binomial, or Poisson) is a good fit for the observed data.
5. Testing the independence of categorical variables: Hypothesis testing can be used to
determine if two categorical variables are independent or if there's a significant association
between them. For example, it can be used to test if there's a relationship between the type of
product and the likelihood of it being returned by a customer.

5. A/B testing: In marketing, product development, and website design, hypothesis testing is
often used to compare the performance of two different versions (A and B) to determine which
one is more effective in terms of conversion rates, user engagement, or other metrics.

Hypothesis Testing ML Applications
1. Model comparison: Hypothesis testing can be used to compare the performance of different
machine learning models or algorithms on a given dataset. For example, you can use a paired
t-test to compare the accuracy or error rate of two models on multiple cross- validation folds
to determine if one model performs significantly better than the other.
2. Feature selection: Hypothesis testing can help identify which features are significantly related
to the target variable or contribute meaningfully to the model's performance. For example, you
can use a t-test, chi-square test, or ANOVA to test the relationship between individual features
and the target variable. Features with significant relationships can be selected for building the
model, while non-significant features may be excluded.
3. Hyperparameter tuning: Hypothesis testing can be used to evaluate the performance of a
model trained with different hyperparameter settings. By comparing the performance of
models with different hyperparameters, you can determine if one set of hyperparameters leads
to significantly better performance.
4. Assessing model assumptions: In some cases, machine learning models rely on certain
statistical assumptions, such as linearity or normality of residuals in linear regression.
Hypothesis testing can help assess whether these assumptions are met, allowing you to
determine if the model is appropriate for the data.

p-value
P-value is the probability of getting a sample as or more extreme(having more evidence against H0)
than our own sample given the Null Hypothesis(H0) is true.
In simple words p-value is a measure of the strength of the evidence against the Null Hypothesis
that is provided by our sample data.

Interpreting p-value

With significance value
When alpha is given, then you compare it with p-value to decide whether to reject the null
hypothesis or not.
If p-value < alpha, Reject the Null hypothesis.
if p-value > alpha, Fail to Reject the Null Hypothesis

Without significance value
1. Very small p-values (e.g., p < 0.01) indicate strong evidence against the null hypothesis,
suggesting that the observed effect or difference is unlikely to have occurred by chance
alone.
2. Small p-values (e.g., 0.01 ≤ p < 0.05) indicate moderate evidence against the null
hypothesis, suggesting that the observed effect or difference is less likely to have occurred
by chance alone.
3. Large p-values (e.g., 0.05 ≤ p < 0.1) indicate weak evidence against the null hypothesis,
suggesting that the observed effect or difference might have occurred by chance alone, but
there is still some level of uncertainty.
4. Very large p-values (e.g., p ≥ 0.1) indicate weak or no evidence against the null
hypothesis, suggesting that the observed effect or difference is likely to have occurred by
chance alone.

p-value in context of z-test
Example: Suppose a company is evaluating the impact of a new training program on the
productivity of its employees. The company has data on the average productivity of its
employees before implementing the training program. The average productivity was 50 units
per day. After implementing the training program, the company measures the productivity of a
random sample of 30 employees. The sample has an average productivity of 53 units per day
and the pop std is 4. The company wants to know if the new training program has significantly
increased productivity.

Example: Suppose a snack food company claims that their Lays wafer packets contain an
average weight of 50 grams per packet. To verify this claim, a consumer watchdog organization
decides to test a random sample of Lays wafer packets. The organization wants to determine
whether the actual average weight differs significantly from the claimed 50 grams. The
organization collects a random sample of 40 Lays wafer packets and measures their weights.
They find that the sample has an average weight of 49 grams, with a pop standard deviation of 5
grams.

t-test

A t-test is a statistical test used in hypothesis testing to compare the means of two samples or to
compare a sample mean to a known population mean. The t-test is based on the t- distribution,
which is used when the population standard deviation is unknown and the sample size is small.
There are three main types of t-tests:
1.

One-sample t-test: The one-sample t-test is used to compare the mean of a single sample to
a known population mean. The null hypothesis states that there is no significant difference
between the sample mean and the population mean, while the alternative hypothesis states
that there is a significant difference.

2. Independent two-sample t-test: The independent two-sample t-test is used to compare the
means of two independent samples. The null hypothesis states that there is no significant
difference between the means of the two samples, while the alternative hypothesis states
that there is a significant difference.
3. Paired t-test (dependent two-sample t-test): The paired t-test is used to compare the means
of two samples that are dependent or paired, such as pre-test and post-test scores for the
same group of subjects or measurements taken on the same subjects under two different
conditions. The null hypothesis states that there is no significant difference between the
means of the paired differences, while the alternative hypothesis states that there is a
significant difference.

Single Sample t-test
A one-sample t-test checks whether a sample mean differs from the population mean.

Assumptions for a single sample t-test
1. Normality - Population from which the sample is drawn is normally distributed
2. Independence - The observations in the sample must be independent, which means that
the value of one observation should not influence the value of another observation.
3. Random Sampling - The sample must be a random and representative subset of the
population.
4. Unknown population std - The population std is not known.
Example: Suppose a manufacturer claims that the average weight of their new chocolate bars is
50 grams, we highly doubt that and want to check this so we drew out a sample of 25 chocolate

bars and measured their weight, the sample mean came out to be 49.7 grams and the sample
std deviation was 1.2 grams. Consider the significance level to be 0.05

Independent 2 Sample t-test
An independent two-sample t-test, also known as an unpaired t-test, is a statistical method
used to compare the means of two independent groups to determine if there is a significant
difference between them.

Assumptions for the test
1. Independence of observations: The two samples must be independent, meaning there is
no relationship between the observations in one group and the observations in the other
group. The subjects in the two groups should be selected randomly and independently.
2. Normality: The data in each of the two groups should be approximately normally
distributed. The t-test is considered robust to mild violations of normality, especially when
the sample sizes are large (typically n ≥ 30) and the sample sizes of the two groups are
similar. If the data is highly skewed or has substantial outliers, consider using a nonparametric test, such as the Mann-Whitney U test.
3. Equal variances (Homoscedasticity): The variances of the two populations should be
approximately equal. This assumption can be checked using the F-test or Levene’s test for
equality of variances. If this assumption is not met, you can use Welch's t-test, which does
not require equal variances.
4. Random sampling: The data should be collected using a random sampling method from
the respective populations. This ensures that the sample is representative of the population
and reduces the risk of selection bias.

Example: Suppose a website owner claims that there is no difference in the average time spent
on their website between desktop and mobile users. To test this claim, we collect data from 30
desktop users and 30 mobile users regarding the time spent on the website in minutes. The
sample statistics are as follows:
desktop users = [12, 15, 18, 16, 20, 17, 14, 22, 19, 21, 23, 18, 25, 17, 16, 24, 20, 19, 22, 18, 15, 14, 23, 16,
12, 21, 19, 17, 20, 14]
mobile_users = [10, 12, 14, 13, 16, 15, 11, 17, 14, 16, 18, 14, 20, 15, 14, 19, 16, 15, 17, 14, 12, 11, 18, 15, 10, 16,
15, 13, 16, 11]
Desktop users:

●
●
●

Sample size (n1): 30
Sample mean (mean1): 18.5 minutes
Sample standard deviation (std_dev1): 3.5 minutes

Mobile users:
● Sample size (n2): 30
● Sample mean (mean2): 14.3 minutes
● Sample standard deviation (std_dev2): 2.7 minutes
We will use a significance level (α) of 0.05 for the hypothesis test.

Dependent(paired) 2 Sample t-test
A paired two-sample t-test, also known as a dependent or paired-samples t-test, is a statistical
test used to compare the means of two related or dependent groups.

Common scenarios where a paired two-sample t-test is used
include:
1. Before-and-after studies: Comparing the performance of a group before and after an
intervention or treatment.
2. Matched or correlated groups: Comparing the performance of two groups that are
matched or correlated in some way, such as siblings or pairs of individuals with similar
characteristics.

Assumptions
1. Paired observations: The two sets of observations must be related or paired in some way,
such as before-and-after measurements on the same subjects or observations from
matched or correlated groups.
2. Normality: The differences between the paired observations should be approximately
normally distributed. This assumption can be checked using graphical methods (e.g.,
histograms, Q-Q plots) or statistical tests for normality (e.g., Shapiro-Wilk test). Note that
the t-test is generally robust to moderate violations of this assumption when the sample
size is large.
3. Independence of pairs: Each pair of observations should be independent of other pairs. In
other words, the outcome of one pair should not affect the outcome of another pair. This
assumption is generally satisfied by appropriate study design and random sampling.

Note:- For this test, the degrees of freedom remain the same as n-1 (because it’s the same
sample subjects, just the observations are taken in different conditions)
Example: Let's assume that a fitness center is evaluating the effectiveness of a new 8-week
weight loss program. They enroll 15 participants in the program and measure their weights
before and after the program. The goal is to test whether the new weight loss program leads to
a significant reduction in the participants' weight.
Before the program:
[80, 92, 75, 68, 85, 78, 73, 90, 70, 88, 76, 84, 82, 77, 91]
After the program:
[78, 93, 81, 67, 88, 76, 74, 91, 69, 88, 77, 81, 80, 79, 88]
Significance level (α) = 0.05

Chi-Square Distribution
The Chi-Square distribution, also written as χ2 distribution, is a continuous probability distribution
that is widely used in statistical hypothesis testing, particularly in the context of goodness-of-fit
tests and tests for independence in contingency tables. It arises when the sum of the squares of
independent standard normal random variables follows this distribution.

The Chi-Square distribution has a single parameter, the degrees of freedom (df), which influences
the shape and spread of the distribution. The degrees of freedom are typically associated with the
number of independent variables or constraints in a statistical problem.

Properties
●

It is a continuous distribution, defined for non-negative values.

●

It is positively skewed, with the degree of skewness decreasing as the degrees of freedom
increase.

●

The mean of the Chi-Square distribution is equal to its degrees of freedom, and its variance
is equal to twice the degrees of freedom.

●

As the degrees of freedom increase, the Chi-Square distribution approaches the normal
distribution in shape.

●

mean = degrees of freedom

●

variance = 2*df = 2*mean

The Chi-Square distribution is used in various statistical tests, such as the Chi- Square
goodness-of-fit test, which evaluates whether an observed frequency distribution fits an expected
theoretical distribution, and the Chi-Square test for independence, which checks the association
between categorical variables in a contingency table.

Chi-Square Test
The Chi-Square test is a statistical hypothesis test used to determine if there is a significant
association between categorical variables or if an observed distribution of categorical data differs
from an expected theoretical distribution. It is based on the Chi-Square (χ2) distribution, and it is
commonly applied in two main scenarios:
1. Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit Test: This test is used to determine if the observed distribution of a
single categorical variable matches an expected theoretical distribution. It is often applied to check
if the data follows a specific probability distribution, such as the uniform or binomial distribution.
2. Chi-Square Test for Independence (Chi-Square Test for Association): This test is used to determine
whether there is a significant association between two categorical variables in a sample.
The Chi-Square test is a non-parametric test. Non- parametric tests do not assume that the data
comes from a specific probability distribution or make any assumptions about population
parameters like the mean or standard deviation.

Why is Chi-square test non parametric?
●

Nature of Data: The Chi-square test is typically used for categorical data (nominal or
ordinal), where the data represents frequencies or counts of occurrences within categories.

This contrasts with parametric tests that deal with continuous data and often require
assumptions about the data's distribution (e.g., normality).
●

Distribution Assumption: While the Chi-square test assumes that the test statistic follows a
Chi-square distribution under the null hypothesis, this assumption is about the distribution
of the test statistic itself, not the underlying data being analyzed. The distribution of the data
in the sample does not need to follow a normal distribution, which is a common requirement
for many parametric tests.

●

No Parameters of Underlying Population: The "non-parametric" label also reflects the fact
that the Chi-square test does not assume anything about the parameters (mean, variance) of
the underlying population distribution from which the sample is drawn. It's primarily
concerned with the distribution of frequencies across different categories and tests
hypotheses about proportions or the independence of categories, rather than about the
parameters of a distribution.

Summary:
The Chi-square test is considered non-parametric because it does not require assumptions
about the distribution of the data itself (e.g., that it is normally distributed) and because it deals
with categorical rather than continuous data. The classification as "non-parametric" is more
about the nature of the data and the absence of assumptions regarding the parameters of the
underlying population's distribution, rather than the distribution of the test statistic under the
null hypothesis. This makes the Chi-square test versatile for analyzing categorical data where
parametric test assumptions cannot be met.

Goodness of Fit Test
The Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit test is a statistical hypothesis test used to determine if the
observed distribution of a single categorical variable matches an expected theoretical
distribution. It helps to evaluate whether the data follows a specific probability distribution,
such as uniform, binomial, or Poisson distribution, among others. This test is particularly useful
when you want to assess if the sample data is consistent with an assumed distribution or if
there are significant deviations from the expected pattern.

Steps
1.

Define the null hypothesis (H0) and the alternative hypothesis (H1):
a. H0: The observed data follows the expected theoretical distribution.
b. H1: The observed data does not follow the expected theoretical distribution.

2. Calculate the expected frequencies for each category based on the theoretical
distribution and the sample size.
3. Compute the Chi-Square test statistic (χ2) by comparing the observed and expected
frequencies. The test statistic is calculated as:
4. where Oi is the observed frequency in category i, Ei is the expected frequency in
category i, and the summation is taken over all categories.
5. Determine the degrees of freedom (df), which is typically the number of categories
minus one (df = k - 1), where k is the number of categories.
6. Calculate the p-value for the test statistic using the Chi-Square distribution with the
calculated degrees of freedom.
7. Compare the test statistic to the critical value or the p-value

Assumptions
1.

Independence: The observations in the sample must be independent of each other.
This means that the outcome of one observation should not influence the outcome of
another observation.

2. Categorical data: The variable being analysed must be categorical, not continuous or
ordinal. The data should be divided into mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories.
3. Expected frequency: Each category should have an expected frequency of at least 5.
This guideline helps ensure that the Chi- Square distribution is a reasonable
approximation for the distribution of the test statistic. Having small expected
frequencies can lead to an inaccurate estimation of the Chi-Square distribution,
potentially increasing the likelihood of a Type I error (incorrectly rejecting the null
hypothesis) or a Type II error (incorrectly failing to reject the null hypothesis).
4. Fixed distribution: The theoretical distribution being compared to the observed data
should be specified before the test is conducted. It is essential to avoid choosing a
distribution based on the observed data, as doing so can lead to biased results.
In the Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit test, we compare the observed frequencies of the
categorical data to the expected frequencies based on a hypothesized distribution. The test
doesn't rely on any assumptions about the underlying distribution's parameters. Instead, it
focuses on comparing observed counts to expected counts, making it a non- parametric test.

Example: Suppose we have a six-sided fair die, and we want to test if the die is indeed fair. We
roll the die 60 times and record the number of times each side comes up. We'll use the
Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit test to determine if the observed frequencies are consistent with a
fair die (i.e., a uniform distribution of the sides).
Observed frequencies:
Side 1: 12 times
Side 2: 8 times
Side 3: 11 times
Side 4: 9 times
Side 5: 10 times
Side 6: 10 times

Example: Suppose a marketing team at a retail company wants to understand the distribution of
visits to their website by day of the week. They have a hypothesis that visits are uniformly
distributed across all days of the week, meaning they expect an equal number of visits on each
day. They collected data on website visits for four weeks and want to test if the observed
distribution matches the expected uniform distribution.

Observed frequencies (number of website visits per day of the week for four weeks):
Monday: 420
Tuesday: 380
Wednesday: 410
Thursday: 400
Friday: 410
Saturday: 430
Sunday: 390

Example: A survey of 800 families in a village with 4 children each revealed the following
distribution:
0 boys - 32 families
1 boy - 178 families
2 boys - 290 families
3 boys - 236 families
4 boys - 64 families
Is this data consistent with the result that male and female births are equally probable?

Test for Independence
The Chi-Square test for independence, also known as the Chi-Square test for association, is a
statistical test used to determine whether there is a significant association between two
categorical variables in a sample. It helps to identify if the occurrence of one variable is
dependent on the occurrence of the other variable, or if they are independent of each other.
The test is based on comparing the observed frequencies in a contingency table (a table that
displays the frequency distribution of the variables) with the frequencies that would be
expected under the assumption of independence between the two variables.

Steps
1.

State the null hypothesis (H0) and alternative hypothesis (H1): H0: There is no
association between the two categorical variables (they are independent).H1: There is
an association between the two categorical variables (they are dependent).

2. Create a contingency table with the observed frequencies for each combination of
the categories of the two variables.
3. Calculate the expected frequencies for each cell in the contingency table assuming
that the null hypothesis is true (i.e., the variables are independent).
4. Compute the Chi-Square test statistic:
χ2 = Σ [(O_ij - E_ij)2 / E_ij] where O_ij is the observed frequency in each cell and
E_ij is the expected frequency.

5. Determine the degrees of freedom: df = (number of rows - 1) * (number of columns 1)
6. Obtain the critical value or p-value using the Chi-Square distribution table or a
statistical software/calculator with the given degrees of freedom and significance
level (commonly α = 0.05).
7. Compare the test statistic to the critical value or the p-value to the significance level
to decide whether to reject or fail to reject the null hypothesis. If the test statistic is
greater than the critical value, or if the p-value is less than the significance level, we
reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is a significant association between
the two variables.

Assumptions
1.

Independence of observations: The observations in the sample should be independent
of each other. This means that the occurrence of one observation should not affect
the occurrence of another observation. In practice, this usually implies that the data
should be collected using a simple random sampling method.

2. Categorical variables: Both variables being tested must be categorical, either ordinal
or nominal. The Chi-Square test for independence is not appropriate for continuous
variables.
3. Adequate sample size: The sample size should be large enough to ensure that the
expected frequency for each cell in the contingency table is sufficient. A common
rule of thumb is that the expected frequency for each cell should be at least 5. If some
cells have expected frequencies less than 5, the test may not be valid, and other
methods like Fisher's exact test may be more appropriate.
4. Fixed marginal totals: The marginal totals (the row and column sums of the
contingency table) should be fixed before the data is collected. This is because the
Chi-Square test for independence assesses the association between the two variables
under the assumption that the marginal totals are fixed and not influenced by the
relationship between the variables.

Example: A researcher wants to investigate if there is an association between the level of
education (categorical variable) and the preference for a particular type of exercise (categorical
variable) among a group of 150 individuals. The researcher collects data and creates the
following contingency table

Applications in Machine Learning
1.

Feature selection: Chi-Square test can be used as a filter-based feature selection method to
rank and select the most relevant categorical features in a dataset. By measuring the
association between each categorical feature and the target variable, you can eliminate
irrelevant or redundant features, which can help improve the performance and efficiency of
machine learning models.

2. Evaluation of classification models: For multi-class classification problems, the Chi-Square
test can be used to compare the observed and expected class frequencies in the confusion
matrix. This can help assess the goodness of fit of the classification model, indicating how
well the model's predictions align with the actual class distributions.
3. Analysing relationships between categorical features: In exploratory data analysis, the ChiSquare test for independence can be applied to identify relationships between pairs of
categorical features. Understanding these relationships can help inform feature engineering
and provide insights into the underlying structure of the data.
4. Discretization of continuous variables: When converting continuous variables into
categorical variables (binning), the Chi-Square test can be used to determine the optimal
number of bins or intervals that best represent the relationship between the continuous
variable and the target variable.
5. Variable selection in decision trees: Some decision tree algorithms, such as the CHAID (Chisquared Automatic Interaction Detection) algorithm, use the Chi-Square test to determine
the most significant splitting variables at each node in the tree. This helps construct more
effective and interpretable decision trees.

F-Distribution
●

Continuous probability distribution: The F-distribution is a continuous probability
distribution used in statistical hypothesis testing and analysis of variance (ANOVA).

●

Fisher-Snedecor distribution: It is also known as the Fisher-Snedecor distribution, named
after Ronald Fisher and George Snedecor, two prominent statisticians.

●

Degrees of freedom: The F-distribution is defined by two parameters - the degrees of
freedom for the numerator (df1) and the degrees of freedom for the denominator (df2).

●

Positively skewed and bounded: The shape of the F-distribution is positively skewed, with its
left bound at zero. The distribution's shape depends on the values of the degrees of freedom.

●

Testing equality of variances: The F-distribution is commonly used to test hypotheses about
the equality of two variances in different samples or populations.

●

Comparing statistical models: The F-distribution is also used to compare the fit of different
statistical models, particularly in the context of ANOVA.

●

F-statistic: The F-statistic is calculated by dividing the ratio of two sample variances or
mean squares from an ANOVA table. This value is then compared to critical values from the
F-distribution to determine statistical significance.

●

Applications: The F-distribution is widely used in various fields of research, including
psychology, education, economics, and the natural and social sciences, for hypothesis
testing and model comparison.

One way ANOVA test
One-way ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) is a statistical method used to compare the means of three
or more independent groups to determine if there are any significant differences between them. It
is an extension of the t-test, which is used for comparing the means of two independent groups.
The term "one-way" refers to the fact that there is only one independent variable (factor) with
multiple levels (groups) in this analysis.
The primary purpose of one-way ANOVA is to test the null hypothesis that all the group means are
equal. The alternative hypothesis is that at least one group mean is significantly different from the
others.

Steps
1.

Define the null and alternative hypotheses.

2. Calculate the overall mean (grand mean) of all the groups combined and mean of all the
groups individually.
3. Calculate the "between-group" and "within-group" sum of squares (SS).
4. Find the between group and within group degree of freedoms

5. Calculate the "between-group" and "within-group" mean squares (MS) by dividing their
respective sum of squares by their degrees of freedom.

6. Calculate the F-statistic by dividing the "between-group" mean square by the "withingroup" mean square.
7. Calculate the p-value associated with the calculated F-statistic using the F-distribution and
the appropriate degrees of freedom. The p-value represents the probability of obtaining an
F-statistic as extreme or more extreme than the calculated value, assuming the null
hypothesis is true.
8. Choose a significance level (alpha), typically 0.05.
9. Compare the calculated p-value with the chosen significance level (alpha).
a. If the p-value is less than or equal to alpha, reject the null hypothesis in favor of the
alternative hypothesis, concluding that there is a significant difference between at
least one pair of group means.
b. If the p-value is greater than alpha, fail to reject the null hypothesis, concluding that
there is not enough evidence to suggest a significant difference between the group
means.
It's important to note that one-way ANOVA only determines if there is a significant difference
between the group means; it does not identify which specific groups have significant differences.
To determine which pairs of groups are significantly different, post-hoc tests, such as Tukey's HSD
or Bonferroni, are conducted after a significant ANOVA result.

Assumptions

1.

Independence: The observations within and between groups should be independent of each
other. This means that the outcome of one observation should not influence the outcome of
another. Independence is typically achieved through random sampling or random
assignment of subjects to groups.

2. Normality: The data within each group should be approximately normally distributed. While
one-way ANOVA is considered to be robust to moderate violations of normality, severe
deviations may affect the accuracy of the test results. If normality is in doubt, nonparametric alternatives like the Shapiro-Wilk test can be considered.
3. Homogeneity of variances: The variances of the populations from which the samples are
drawn should be equal, or at least approximately so. This assumption is known as
homoscedasticity. If the variances are substantially different, the accuracy of the test results
may be compromised. Levene's test or Bartlett's test can be used to assess the homogeneity
of variances. If this assumption is violated, alternative tests such as Welch's ANOVA can be
used.

Post-hoc Test
Post hoc tests, also known as post hoc pairwise comparisons or multiple comparison tests, are
used in the context of ANOVA when the overall test indicates a significant difference among the
group means. These tests are performed after the initial one-way ANOVA to determine which
specific groups or pairs of groups have significantly different means.
The main purpose of post hoc tests is to control the family-wise error rate (FWER) and adjust
the significance level for multiple comparisons to avoid inflated Type I errors. There are several
post hoc tests available, each with different characteristics and assumptions. Some common
post hoc tests include:
●

Bonferroni correction: This method adjusts the significance level (α) by dividing it by
the number of comparisons being made. It is a conservative method that can be
applied when making multiple comparisons, but it may have lower statistical power
when a large number of comparisons are involved.

●

Tukey's HSD (Honestly Significant Difference) test: This test controls the FWER and is
used when the sample sizes are equal and the variances are assumed to be equal
across the groups. It is one of the most commonly used post hoc tests.

When performing post hoc tests, it is essential to choose a test that aligns with the
assumptions of your data (e.g., equal variances, equal sample sizes) and provides an appropriate
balance between controlling Type I errors and maintaining statistical power.

Why is t-test not used for more than 3 categories?
●

Increased Type I error: When you perform multiple comparisons using individual t-tests, the
probability of making a Type I error (false positive) increases. The more tests you perform,
the higher the chance that you will incorrectly reject the null hypothesis in at least one of
the tests, even if the null hypothesis is true for all groups.

●

Difficulty in interpreting results: When comparing multiple groups using multiple t-tests,
the interpretation of the results can become complicated. For example, if you have 4 groups
and you perform 6 pairwise t-tests, it can be challenging to interpret and summarize the
overall pattern of differences among the groups.

●

Inefficiency: Using multiple t-tests is less efficient than using a single test that accounts for
all groups, such as one-way ANOVA. One-way ANOVA uses the information from all the
groups simultaneously to estimate the variability within and between the groups, which can
lead to more accurate conclusions.

Application in Machine Learning
●

Hyperparameter tuning: When selecting the best hyperparameters for a machine learning
model, one-way ANOVA can be used to compare the performance of models with different
hyperparameter settings. By treating each hyperparameter setting as a group, you can
perform one-way ANOVA to determine if there are any significant differences in
performance across the various settings.

●

Feature selection: One-way ANOVA can be used as a univariate feature selection method to
identify features that are significantly associated with the target variable, especially when
the target variable is categorical with more than two levels. In this context, the one-way
ANOVA is performed for each feature, and features with low p-values are considered to be
more relevant for prediction.

●

Algorithm comparison: When comparing the performance of different machine learning
algorithms, one-way ANOVA can be used to determine if there are any significant
differences in their performance metrics (e.g., accuracy, F1 score, etc.) across multiple runs
or cross-validation folds. This can help you decide which algorithm is the most suitable for a
specific problem.

●

Model stability assessment: One-way ANOVA can be used to assess the stability of a machine
learning model by comparing its performance across different random seeds or
initializations. If the model's performance varies significantly between different

initializations, it may indicate that the model is unstable or highly sensitive to the choice of
initial conditions.

Regression Analysis
Regression analysis is a statistical method used to examine the relationship between one dependent
variable and one or more independent variables. The goal of regression analysis is to understand
how the dependent variable changes when one or more independent variables are altered, and to
create a model that can predict the value of the dependent variable based on the values of the
independent variables.
1.

Define the research question: Identify the dependent variable (the variable you want to
predict or explain) and the independent variable(s) (the variables that you think influence the
dependent variable).

2. Collect and prepare data: Gather data for the dependent and independent variables. The data
should be organized in a tabular format, with each row representing an observation and
each column representing a variable. It's essential to clean and pre-process the data to
handle missing values, outliers, and other potential issues that may affect the analysis.
3. Visualize the data: Before fitting a linear regression model, it's helpful to create scatter plots
to visualize the relationship between the dependent variable and each independent variable.
This can help you identify trends, outliers, and any potential issues with the data.
4. Check assumptions: Linear regression has some underlying assumptions, including linearity,
independence of errors, homoscedasticity (constant variance of errors), and normality of
errors. You can use diagnostic plots and statistical tests to check whether these assumptions
hold for your data.
5. Fit the linear regression model: Use statistical software (e.g., R, Python, or Excel) to fit a
linear regression model to your data. The model will estimate the regression coefficients
(intercept and slope) that minimize the sum of squared residuals (i.e., the differences
between the observed and predicted values of the dependent variable).
6. Interpret the model: Analyze the estimated regression coefficients, their standard errors,
t-values, and p-values to determine the statistical significance of the relationship between
the dependent and independent variables. The R-squared value and adjusted R-squared
value can provide insights into the goodness-of-fit of the model and the proportion of
variation in the dependent variable explained by the independent variables.

7. Validate the model: If you have a sufficiently large dataset, you can split it into a training and
testing set. Fit the linear regression model to the training set, and then use the model to
predict the dependent variable in the testing set. Calculate the mean squared error, root
mean squared error, or another performance metric to assess the predictive accuracy of the
model.
8. Report results: Summarize the findings of the linear regression analysis in a clear and
concise manner, including the estimated coefficients, their interpretation, and any
limitations or assumptions that may impact the results.

What's the statistics connection?
Why is Regression Analysis required?

